---
title: 'Comparative Genomics of Clavibacter Bacteria'
date: 2019-02-11T19:27:37+10:00
weight: 1
---

---
<br>

### Clavibacter bacteria are host specific pathogens with many predicted virulence effectors. 
Clavibacter species cause disease on a narrow host range of plants, but their ability to colonize endophytically is broad.7,8 There are six pathogens of the genus: C. michiganensis (Cm - bacterial canker of tomato), C. sepedonicus (Cs - potato ring rot), C. capsici (Cc - bacterial canker of pepper), C. insidiosus (Ci - bacterial wilt of alfalfa), C. nebraskensis (Cn - Goss’s wilt of corn), and C. tessellarius (Ct - bacterial mosaic on wheat) (Fig. 1–Left).1,2,9 However, Cm and Cc break this rule, where both pathogens are weakly pathogenic on the related hosts, tomato and pepper (Fig. 1–Left).10 The tomato pathogen Cm is the most-well studied. Cm carries multiple virulence genes on two plasmids, pCM1 and pCM2, and within a ~129Kb pathogenicity island (PAI), chp/tomA.5,11 While the plasmid number, size, and gene content vary within and across species, the entire chp/tomA PAI is only found in Cm.5,8,12 Instead, fragments and/or homologs of PAI members can be found in Cc, Cs, and Ci genomes.13–15 The chp/tomA PAI encodes suites of putative serine proteases of the Sbt, Chp, and Ppa families and carbohydrate activating enzymes (CAZymes). Functional validation of some of effectors include tomatinase, which degrades the plant defense compound α-tomatine, and celA, a cellulase which breaks down the cell wall component, cellulose.11,16 While this provides insight into mechanisms of disease for Cm in tomato, the plant targets of most effectors are unknown.4 Even less is known for other pathogens of the genus. While pathogen evolution is unclear, previous work suggests Clavibacter pathogens have undergone niche adaptation as a result of plant-microbe co-evolution.13,15  

#### 1.1 Generate a robust genomic data set as a resource for Clavibacter research.
In order to comprehensively predict effectors, I will generate a robust dataset of multiple high-quality genomes not well sampled in NCBI (Fig. 4A). I have collaborated with researchers who have donated 61 strains of pathogenic Clavibacter from diverse timepoints and locations to sequence using Illumina and Oxford Nanopore technologies. For Illumina sequencing, I will prepare barcoded paired-end libraries to be sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq Platform. For long read sequencing, I will finish generating ligation-based multiplexed libraries (LSK109) to run on an Oxford Nanopore MinION Mk1b. I aim to generate read coverage of around 30X for each technology per isolate. To improve throughput and repeatability of genome assembly and annotation, both reads will be passed through a custom Snakemake pipeline.30 This pipeline includes demultiplexing reads using Trimmomatic and qcat, assembly using Unicycler, annotation via prokka, and assembly statistics through Quast.31 The completion of these genome sequences will provide a robust resource to investigate mechanisms governing pathogenicity and host range.  

#### 1.2 Predict effectors involved in pathogenicity and host range.  
Pathogen adaptation to a given environment has occured through gene gains, losses, and diversification.34–37 In our model, Clavibacter pathogens have adapted to a particular host through subtle changes in effector content, which can be predicted through a variety of computational approaches. For candidate protease and CAZyme effectors, I will apply a similar approach using a combination of tools as described above. Differences in amino acid similarity may suggest differences in plant host targets, which may support differential host-dependent interactions. Thus, percent identity will be calculated in an ortholog-focused manner to determine their similarity across species.38 Selection will be determined through ka/ks test to assess if effector homologs are under different selection pressures. Positive selection of effectors in a host-specific manner may be indicative of a recent co-evolutionary arms race to its disease-compatible host. To assess effector selection in a population-focused manner, Tajima’s D will be calculated and compared to neutrally evolving housekeeping genes.39 A population genetics focused approach would suggest favorable effectors to a given environment would be positively selected upon (i.e. high Tajima’s D) and swept into the population. Finally, phylogenetic effector trees will be generated to assess their evolutionary history and determine if any gain-loss events have occurred.40 These experiments will be interpreted with available virulence data. In total, I anticipate being able to predict effectors essential for pathogenicity and host range.  

#### 1.3 Functionally assess predicted effector loci.
Functional assessment of in silico predictions will be performed using genetic and biochemical assays. Previous work supports proteases and CAZymes as candidates for mediating these processes (Fig.2).4 Clustered effectors will be selected for deletion analyses and subsequent pathogenicity tests.8,41,42 To assess the difference in response to xylem and apoplastic colonization, standard inoculation methods, prick (stem) and spray (foliar) inoculation, will be used.8,42 Additionally, closely related endophytes will be used as a genetic background to test effector contribution to a respective disease. For example, clustered effectors hypothesized to be important for disease in tomato can be expressed in an endophyte and assesses for differences in wilting, canker formation, and colonization compared to endophyte and pathogen controls. Similarly, effectors hypothesized to be important for host specificity in tomato could be transformed into another pathogen which grows endophytically on tomato, such as Cs, and assessed for differences in wilting, canker formation, and colonization in tomato. For all plant assays, eight plants per experiment with a minimum of three biological replicates will be executed. Virulence will be visually assessed and quantified when possible and bacterial titers will be performed.8,39 Significance compared to wildtype and mock controls will be determined using a one-sided ANOVA with a Tukey’s post means comparison test. Protease effectors likely target plant host proteins. Therefore, proteases of interest will be purified and TAILS-Mass Spectroscopy, which isotopically labels N-terminal amine groups of a proteome sample, will be ran against xylem fluid to identify plant targets.43 CAZymes, which are thought to be key for host range, can be assessed for their ability to break down different plant hosts cell walls through an ELISA test that recognizes different epitopes of plant cell walls.8 I anticipate analyzing the importance of ~5 groups of effectors and will tailor experiments based on their identity. The completion of these experiments will enable identification of the first host targets of Clavibacter effectors and their contribution to host range.  


##### Publications related to this work:
[Thapa, S. P. et al. The Evolution, Ecology, and Mechanisms of Infection by Gram-Positive, Plant-Associated Bacteria. Annu Rev Phytopathol 57, 341–365 (2019).](https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev-phyto-082718-100124)